# Un-Black-Boxing Artificial Neural Networks: Predicting and Explaining Bank Customer’s Cross-Sell Likelihood
## About the Paper
This research paper was written in summer 2019 within the Master's Seminar *Data Mining in Marketing: Data Driven Customer Analytics with Machine Learning*. It was awarded the [Norbert-Walter-Förderpreis](https://www.fwwg.de/foerderpreis/) for the best Master-level seminar theses in business and economics at Goethe University (second price). Read the full paper here: [Un-Black-Boxing Artificial Neural Networks: Predicting and Explaining Bank Customer’s Cross-Sell Likelihood](dami-paper.pdf)

## Summary and Findings
The rise of machine learning techniques has come with a great increase of predictive accuracy in many settings (Jordan & Mitchell 2015). The hype around those techniques has led to a widespread use of them in many fields in science and practice—from medicine to business or self-driving cars (Chen & Asch 2017). However, some of those methods are increasingly computationally expensive and might not in every case be superior to traditional regression-based methods such as simple multivariate linear regression or logit models.
This paper uses a data set from a large German bank with numerous customer characteristics to predict whether an existing customer buys another product—also referred to as cross-selling. The goal of this research is first to predict weather a customer will cross-buy and open a checking account and second to identify certain characteristics of typical customers that increase the likelihood of opening that account. Therefore, this paper introduces a complex Artificial Neural Network (ANN) with optimized predictive power and compares the predictions to a simple logit model. One downside of ANN models in particular the lack of interpretability—they are widely regarded as black-boxes (Benítez et al. 1997, Dayhoff & DeLeo 2001). This paper addresses this shortcoming by implementing LIME—a method to explain individual predictions of neural networks (Ribeiro et al. 2016). The paper is structured as follows: The first chapter gives a short introduction to cross-selling theory and is followed by the explanation of the implemented statistical methods. The subsequent chapter presents the empirical results and especially compares the ANN to the simple logit model. The paper concludes with implications for practitioners and outlines further research avenues.

Besides predicting the cross-sell likelihood and explaining the “black-box”-prediction, this research questions the abundant praise and blind trust that sophisticated machine learning techniques are the cure to any predictive problem. To illustrate this claim, this paper implements a sophisticated hyperparameter-tuned Artificial Neural Network and compares its predictions to a simple logit model. Surprisingly, the ANN performs slightly worse than the benchmark logit model in terms of accuracy and only marginally outperforms it in terms of area under the ROC curve. Due to the enormous computational resources required for finding a satisfactory ANN and marginal differences in predictive quality, this paper argues against the implementation of neural networks to predict cross-sell in this particular business setting and for simpler methods such as a logit model.

The second research question—identifying underlying characteristics that drive cross-selling—is initially impossible to answer with a black-box ANN. However, this paper implements a local approximation of the neural network with LIME by an easily interpretable regression model. This enables detailed insights into which customer features support or prevent cross-selling on an individual customer level. Not surprisingly, sending mail about opening a new account is the most contributing feature for the four individually analyzed customers, followed directly by the customer’s age. Younger clients are more likely to cross-buy, which is also supported on the global level by looking at correlations and individual scatter plots. Even though those two methods mostly answer the research question, there is still more research to be done to establish causality. On a global level, the methodology implemented in this study only reports which features are associated with cross-selling. However, no reasonable statement can be made about which features cause an increased cross-selling probability across all customers.
